All right.
Welcome back.
So this section is all about AJAX now age Ajax is something that I personally love and my own developer
life to build apps with but more importantly as a teacher I find it really fun and just enjoyable to
teach and that's mainly because I'm not being cheesy here when I say this but it opens up a whole new
world of possibilities of things you can do with your applications.
You can suddenly make way better cleaner smoother more interesting experiences for your users and we'll
see why in just a sec but let's start with the basics.
So as we already covered it stands for Asynchronous JavaScript and X-amount AJAX which in today's landscape
is actually not the best name.
We'll talk more about why.
But it really has to do with this last part.
The ex Ajax doesn't really sound as good ending with any other letter.
But nowadays X-amount is just not as popular as it used to be and has been replaced or usurped depending
on how you look at it with another data format called Jaison which will cover in the next video.
But for now let's focus on Asynchronous JavaScript that's really the key and something else that's not
as important.
So let's keep going and we'll start by actually talking about what AJAX is not because there's a lot
of misconceptions about this.
A lot of people think that Ajax is a library which is not.
It's not a library.
It's not a framework and it's not a technology.
It's none of these things.
In fact it's much much simpler than any of it.
It's not a tool someone created.
Nobody owns it.
Nobody developed it.
All that Ajax is is an approach to web development a concept a way of building web sites and that's
really it.
So this revolution that Ajax was just comes down to a different way of structuring apps using existing
tools and technologies.
So just putting them together in a different way.
So as this slide shows around the year 2005 a little bit earlier potentially there were tools that we
use today things like HDMI all javascript was getting much more popular.
C S the domm.
And then this other thing called XM.
HTP requests which we'll be spending more time on.
But this is a tool or an API that allows you to make requests make HTP requests request it's kind of
a mouthful from the browser using javascript.
So these five things HVM LCS s javascript Plus the DOM API and an API that gave you the ability to make
requests from your browser combined are what formed Ajax and it wasn't one person.
There wasn't an aha moment at least that we can pinpoint in history.
But over time what happened is that a couple of kind of cutting edge developers and companies Google
us on the first ones kind of had a moment of saying OK wait a second all these pieces are here for us
to put them together to make applications that can update that can change content dynamically without
the page refreshing.
So this is what it boils down to.
AJAX is just taking existing technologies and just putting them together in a different way.
If you're interested in this sort of thing this is a blog post written by a developer named Jesse James.
GARRETT back in 2005.
And this is the first documented instance of the term Ajax.
He is the guy who coined the term.
Now he's not the first person to use AJAX in a web app.
He is just identifying a trend and naming it.
But this is sort of like the genesis of that word and where everything kind of exploded from here after
he wrote this post.
I definitely recommend reading it.
Things have changed a bit but really not much.
The key concepts are the same.
There are some great diagrams to talk about you know the traditional web app flow versus the Ajax model
and the flow basically summed up.
See this is interrupted here on Ajax not interrupted at all because there's this additional layer of
javascript that's doing the back and forth for us sort of the middleman.
Furthermore Furthermore I really just say that there are some nice updates down here.
Some Q and A's but it's just kind of a cool thing to see.
Nice little time capsule.
And it also talks about some of the first apps to use AJAX or to use javascript client side request.
To their advantage things like Gmail.
I never after a fresh Jamail to get new items or new new emails or Google Maps.
How you can load more if the map just by scrolling over.
Those are kind of revolutionary and are some of the first apps to use AJAX.
Even before it had a name.
So definitely check this out.
So what it boils down to is that with Ajax Web sites can send and request information or data from a
server in the background should highlight that in the background without disturbing the current page.
So that's very different and I'll show you an example in a moment of how web apps used to work and some
of them still work this way.
But the difference is very stark and that led to today's single page apps that term single page application
very popular kind of buzzword D as well as frameworks that help you manage single page applications.
Things like angular or MBRD or even react.
So all of this stems from Ajax.
OK so here's a little illustration.
If you use Pinterest this might be familiar to you.
If you don't this is Pinterest.
Now you can see what it looks like and what's happening here is that as I scroll down the screen new
items are loading.
Right so I don't have to click a button to take me to the next page.
The page never refreshes.
I never change the page that I'm on.
This infinite scroll which is not just limited to Pinterest.
It's kind of a common feature on sites like tumbler.
Plenty of other sites out there.
As I keep scrolling down new content is loaded dynamically into the page using AJAX mainly using javascript
which is going to get data with in the background that disturbing the page and then once it's back it's
adding into the page relatively seamlessly.
So that's done with Ajax and compare that to the experience of using Reddit.
One of my personal favorite sites I probably spend way too much time on as I scroll down and want more
content.
I click the next button and notice what happens.
It might be hard to see in this little video but it refreshes the entire page.
It starts me over at the top.
There's an entire request that's made from the browser not through javascript.
Basically starting the whole process over.
So this is not using AJAX.
This is kind of the old fashioned way.
So not Ajax.
So here's really what's happening with Pinterest.
Just as a single example.
So I hit the bottom of the page and that triggers an event.
Javascript says while the user scrolled to the bottom.
Go go go.
Send a request to a server.
It's probably some Pinterest or definitely is Pinterest own internal server they have set up for this.
Send a request for a server and get more content.
So then that sends a request to the server and this is the key part.
This is what's different in the past.
This would be a page refresh.
This would be a separate request from your browser but with Ajax the ability to make a request through
javascript It just happens on the background while you're on this page.
So it happens servers like.
OK here you go here's the new content.
It sends it back and then with my javascript.
Once I have that data back I was waiting for it.
The Javascript was waiting once it get it back then it inserts it into the page with some edge to him.
So it's not just inserting plain data but it makes image tags and whatever these are paragraph tags
and link tags or tags and it just appends them to the page.
In this case.
So that's a really common workflow.
Get some data.
Some event triggers some some request that request goes off through javascript gets data it comes back
and then gets added to the page.
So here's the entire workforce again.
What really it boils down to is this sending that request to the server and getting more content.
That's the key part of all of this and it's what we'll spend a lot of time on in this section.
How do we make those requests.
There's a couple of different ways.
So we'll talk about the XM HTP request.
Then let's talk about something else called the fecche API which is sort of the newer approach but it's
not quite implemented across all the browsers yet.
And then we'll talk about third party libraries.
So additional things that aren't native to the browsers like Jay query or X-post that you can include
yourself in use.
So we're going to talk about a couple of different ways all these ways here if making requests and along
the way we'll build a couple of demonstrations in an app that illustrate how Ajax works and of the flow
of putting those moving pieces together.
OK.
So that is a quick intro to what AJAX is.
Remember it's the confluence of these technologies that allow us to make seamless web apps where data
is being moved back and forth in the background and the page is updated dynamically without the user
having to refresh the page.
All right.